---
layout: post
title: What is DeSci?
---

A movement of scientists, builders, artists, communicators, and investors is developing tools that might radically change science. The movement is called _decentralized science_ or _DeSci_ for short. Let's take a peak behind the DeSci curtain.

To start, the term DeSci is a conjoining of “decentralized science.” Although there is some truth to DeSci being defined by decentralization, this naming is a bit of a historical accident. Defining DeSci in terms of decentralization can be misleading, just as defining the Protestant Revolution in terms of schizms can be misleading. The Protestant Revolution led to many schizms within the Christian church, but a historian who focuses on this fact without acknowledging the role of the printing press, institutional practices, and theology will be left with a wanting account of the period. Likewise, DeSci has more to do with technology and the problems within the established institutions than with decentralization as an end in itself.

The movement is called DeSci because it happens to have grown out of the broader Web3 movement which seeks to use peer-to-peer (i.e., decentralized) protocols, such as the ones that power blockchains, to create a permissionless and trustless web allowing users to be self-sovereign in the digital world. Bitcoin, the original financial blockchain, can be regarded as having been a response to the failure of centralized financial institutions in the 2008 financial crises. When he coined the term “Web 3.0,” Ethereum co-founder Dr. Gavin Wood pointed to the unconstitutional monitoring done by the (centralized) US government, which was revealed by Edward Snowden, as a key reason society should upgrade the web. DeSci, as far as I know, does not have an exciting origin story like Bitcoin and Web3. However, having grown out of the Web3 community, DeSci is sometimes discussed as though it’s slaying the dragon of centralized scientific institutions in the same way Bitcoin sought to slay the dragon of central banks. More often, though, the people building DeSci ecosystems talk about inefficiencies with the ways research is funded, the peer review process, or the storage of scientific data.

Seeing that the movement’s name (“decentralized science”) is more an accident of history than a term designating the essence of the movement, I propose we approach DeSci not from the angle of decentralization but from the perspective of humans who value scientific knowledge–from the perspective of scientists who want the machine of science to run efficiently.

At its heart, DeSci is a movement to create better tools to support scientific research. Unpacking this claim with a focus on “tools” will, I think, yield a picture of DeSci with higher resolution than a discussion of decentralization would yield.

DeSci tools are making it easier to fund research. With cryptocurrencies and smart contracts, it is relatively easy to set up a crowdfunding smart contract which can accept funds (in the form of cryptocurrency such as ETH) from anyone in the world, and the contract can be programmed to only accept so much money. Using cryptocurrency and smart contracts has the additional benefit of being more open and transparent than the current system: Anyone can see the smart contract’s code as well as the address(es) which can withdraw the funds (although the address(es) are not required to be associated with any real life human(s)). A project that has emerged within the last few years is Molecule, whose team has created the IP-NFT framework, a framework that allows intellectual property to be represented as an NFT and so can be purchased and even fractionalized to allow a collective of investors anywhere around the globe to have partial ownership in the IP tied to the NFT.

DeSci tools are also improving the efficiency of certain research activities. For example, in the 21st century, scientists deal with crazy amounts of data but often don’t have good ways of storing the data in a way that makes the data accessible to other scientists. This is a problem because accessibility and discoverability of data are crucial to modern science. If a researcher has an idea they want to test but cannot access the right data, they must either shelve the idea or apply for a grant and unnecessarily expend resources to collect data themselves. Groups within DeSci are using peer-to-peer storage networks to ensure data doesn’t get lost and is available to researchers who need it.

DeSci isn’t restricting itself to financial and technological problems, though. It is also tackling peer review, an essential practice of science that helps researchers refine each other’s methods, theories, and claims. The current peer review process is intrasparent, and there are not always incentives for researchers to do quality peer review work. Reviewers often have no skin in the game: They aren’t paid for their time spent reviewing, and if they half-ass the review or give a bad review for bad reasons (such as personal bias against the author), they’re reputation among other academics remains unchanged. [This piece on scientific publishing is really good: https://desci.medium.com/why-we-need-to-fundamentally-rethink-scientific-publishing-43f2ae39af76]

The above outlined some major problems within science that DeSci can help solve. But another feature–a big and potentially transformative feature–of DeSci is that it decouples scientific assets and activities that have previously remained coupled (e.g., experiment, dataset, model, paper, IP) and creates markets between the decoupled entities, allowing the scientific ecosystem to be more self-organizing than in the current scientific ecosystem. This is a big claim, though, and if I don’t delete it, I should develop it fully elsewhere.
