Maybe we can represent the human actor as a function of functions. We can call it _the decision-making function_.

I think the decision-making function could be regarded as an interpretation of Aristotle's *Nicomachean Ethics* inspired by Kant's *Critique of Pure Reason*.

Before diving into the idea, I want to pass through these texts, coming out the other side with a few intellectual apparatus.

Kant's brilliance was his turn toward the structure of the mind to explain regularities of experience that had, until then, been regarded as existing "out there" in the world independent of our experience. He drew up a model of the mind in which the structure of experience (e.g., that our experience is always in space and time) is *determined* by our mental faculties, and we have no control over how these faculties determine experience. In describing these faculties (and their parts), Kant used the term "function of unity." Causality, for instance, is a function by which two appearances are always united by a necessary law (if *p*, then *q*). 
<!-- Interestingly (for thoughts relating to Wolfram's research), Kant dubs the understanding "*the faculty of rules*." -->
Inspired by Kant, let's keep in mind the idea of a "function of unity" as we progress.

Aristotle *Ethics*, I think, is as much about *how* we make decisions as about which ones we ought to make. He observes that each one of us is split into rational and irrational components. The irrational involves all bodily desires, and the rational involves things like planning. Because our souls have both rational and irrational parts, we can sometimes feel pulled in separate directions (a feeling called *akrasia*). Aristotle also observed that humans have habits. Because we have habits which form the basis of our character, we ought to develop the right ones. Developing the right habits requires--in a word--practice. Part of this involves learning to be "pleased by what ought to please us and pained by what ought to pain us." 

From Aristotle, I want to keep both the idea that humans have multiple decision-making components and the idea that humans settle into habits which can be optimized toward goals.

Combining these ideas from Kant and Aristotle we get a concoction that might look like this: The function of unity will be the human qua decision-making organism. This function of unity will be composed of rational and irrational parts. And this function of unity (and its parts) will be capable of falling into patterns and determining which patterns are worth falling into. We might call this result *the decision-making function*--a composite of probabilistic and more or less hierarchical rules which govern behavior (and influence what the *process* of reaching a decision feels like).

"Decision-making function" is a slight misnomer because "decision" might imply highly cognitive processes. If we imagine a ladder of cognition--where pure math is at the top and motor movements near the bottom--the decision-making function applies to every rung on the ladder. Like Aristotle, I want a vocabulary that allows us to discuss and optimize even decisions which are unreflective. "Deciding" when to stop eating is an example of an unreflective decision. Unless someone is deliberately trying to undo some of their eating habits, they do not reflect on when to stop eating. All of the "reflection" of such a decision is in the body--the hands, the mouth, the eyes, the stomach. The hand puts down the fork, the jaw stops chewing, etc.
