Category: Amateur Psychology/Phenomenology

## Abstract
When talking about inner conflict, we typically make beliefs, values, and desires the adversaries in the conflict. For instance, for a person who knows (and therefore believes) smoking is bad for him, but still has the desire to smoke, the conflict is between a belief and a desire. This model, however, fails to properly characterize some kinds of inner conflict, such as socially derived conflict over one’s identity. In the first section, I use an example of such inner conflict over one’s identity to introduce the idea of the internal community. In the second section, I describe the salient characteristics of the internal community. In the third section, I show how the idea might be useful to sociometer theory and cognitive dissonance theory. In the fourth section, I respond to three potential objections, namely, that the internal community presents a problem of infinite regress, that it is reducible to memory, and that it fails to make room for affect. The fifth and final section contains a summary.

## 1. Introduction
Let’s look at an instance that isn’t fully characterized or accounted for by the traditional model of inner conflict. In their discussion of subjective reality, Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann say, “One can maintain one’s self-identification as a man of importance only in a milieu that confirms this identity.”[^1]  In the case that the “man of importance” finds himself in a milieu that doesn’t support this identity, his subjective reality is threatened. This identity of importance is mainly supported by “significant others,” the people who are most important and present in one’s life, such as one’s parents during childhood.[^2]  One’s identity is tied more to the opinions of significant others than to those of strangers, so even though the man of importance might interact with a condescending barista on a daily basis, his identity as a man of importance isn’t threatened; the barista’s character assessments are inconsequential to his subjective reality.

I want to focus on a situation in which the identity of the man of importance is simultaneously challenged and supported by his significant others, and I want to focus on the internal conflict that occurs when he is not in a face-to-face conversation with these significant others. Consider that the significant others for the man of importance are his brother and a coworker. Both his brother and colleague (as well as his job, salary, house, etc.) maintain the subjective reality that he is a man of importance. The brother and colleague play their role (mainly) through conversation; in face-to-face interactions, they continually reaffirm the identity of the man of importance. Consider, now, that the man of importance loses his job. The coworker starts talking to him as though he is inferior, as though he is no man of importance, but his brother doesn’t treat him differently and thereby continues to play his role in maintaining the man’s identity as a man of importance. In this situation, the man’s identity is called into question, and he feels a tension between his identity as a man of importance (supported by his brother and by his previous experiences) and his opposing identity (supported by his previous coworker and recent layoff). The tension between these two identities, between these two voices, is felt not only when he is in the presence of people who support such identities but also when he is physically alone. And even when he is alone, he will likely experience the conflict emotionally, as though the identities were battling and he could feel the emotions of both sides. This example is no doubt simple, but it is only intended to represent a scenario in which all sides of an internal conflict have prominent—even obtrusive—representation.

How would we use beliefs, values, and desires to explain this tension? It is unsatisfying to describe the conflict as occurring between beliefs because conflict between beliefs does not necessarily accompany an emotion or affect, particularly if the beliefs hardly influence action (e.g., in the case of holding a philosophical position that only affects which propositions one assents to).[^3]  Because the man of importance experiences a significant conflict in his self-concept, a description of this inner conflict that fails to consider the emotional aspect is incomplete. If we stick to the view that ascribes the conflict to beliefs only, then we might try to explain the emotional aspect as an epiphenomenon, a mere unfortunate byproduct that shouldn’t factor into our analysis. But this, again, is incomplete. Emotions are essential to the lived experience of internal conflict. And they influence both thought and behavior.[^4]  An account of internal conflict that dismisses emotions neglects important information.

If, for the man of importance, the tension between identities is not equivalent to tension between beliefs, can we include values and desires to explain the tension? The tension cannot be a belief-desire clash because the tension is about how he thinks of himself (and how others think of him) rather than how he wants to think of himself. It cannot be a belief-value clash because if a “value” were used to explain this situation, it could be reduced to a belief or desire. It cannot be a value-value clash for the same reason. It cannot be a value-desire clash because if it were, he would either have to value being a man of insignificance or desire to be a man of insignificance, neither of which is plausible. And it isn’t a desire-desire clash because he has no desire to be a man of insignificance. An account appealing to beliefs, values, and desires does not adequately characterize the man’s experience. It fails to adequately account for the lived experience of this emotional internal conflict that originated in the social world. 

The conflict, I contend, is better understood as a conflict between voices in an internal community rather than between beliefs, values, desires, or a combination of these. If the conflict occurred only when the man of importance was in the presence of, say, his brother and previous coworker, the conflict could be accurately described as a conflict between people, people whose opinions of this man are incompatible. However, the conflict continues even when the man is entirely alone. He takes the social conflict with him, or rather, it follows him, as though it is as present to him as the “real,” face-to-face conflict would be. The opinions and the emotional colors of those opinions—conveyed by tones and gestures—are heard, felt, and reacted to by the man just as they would be if all the voices were physically present. That is to say, the internal conflict is between the voice of his coworker and the voice of his brother, though each voice might include content from elsewhere, such as the disapproval of his boss when the man was fired or the complements from clients during his more successful years. The internal community accounts for this internal conflict better than the traditional model of cognitive dissonance because it is truer to the lived experience, to the fact that the conflict has a social nature and an irreducible emotional aspect.

## 2. What is the internal community?
This example of internal conflict shows us something about the sociality of human beings. It shows not only that are we political animals but that we always carry our communities with us. And we carry our communities with us not just in our biases or accents, but in our conscious experience of ourselves and, as I discuss below, our experience of the world. Each of us has an internal community, composed of voices from many sources. The voices in the internal community vary along a spectrum of individuality and anonymity. They vary in degree of alterity. And the whole community varies in its degree of integration.

To describe the spectrum of individuality and anonymity, we first need to look at how Berger and Luckmann describe it in the context of how we apprehend others. Berger and Luckmann point out that in everyday life, “I apprehend the other by means of typificatory schemes even in the face-to-face situation, although these schemes are more ‘vulnerable’ to his interference than in ‘remoter’ forms of interaction.”[^5]  That is, I constantly understand someone as a member of a number of categories (e.g., sports fan, American, business person). Someone with whom I frequently have face-to-face interactions is, to me, apprehended as more individualized than someone with whom I only interact over email or with whom I don’t interact at all. The latter is anonymous to me; the American Businessman, say, is merely an anonymous unchanging type and need not correspond to any person I’ve talked to. Thus, we have an individuality-anonymity spectrum, along which any “other” is apprehended.

This spectrum of individuality and anonymity applies to voices in the internal community. A highly individualized voice is more or less a memory or imagination of the source of the voice (which might be an interaction with a person, though it need not be). For example, a kid who furtively reaches for the cookie jar hears his mother’s warnings even when she is out of town. A highly anonymous voice, however, is experienced almost as not having a source. This is because it is typically an agglomeration of voices, and the sources for the individual voices have been forgotten (e.g., in the case of childhood experiences) or covered over by a taken-for-granted social reality (e.g., in the case of “the they,” as discussed below). This points to a distinction between the anonymity in one’s apprehension of the “other” and the anonymity of a voice in the internal community. In Berger and Luckmann’s description, familiarity is antithetical to anonymity, but in the internal community, familiarity need not reduce anonymity. Before talking about an example of an anonymous voice, we need to include the other dimension of a voice in the internal community: alterity.

A voice with a high degree of alterity is one with which the individual does not identify. It represents an outgroup. For example, if nothing is more important to me than my identity as a Republican, there is likely a Democrat voice in my internal community to which I constantly react (in conversation, in thought, etc.). Although the Democrat voice is quite present, it is imbued with otherness. A voice with zero alterity is one the individual calls her own. A voice with little alterity might be, to stick with the above example, the Republican voice.

The individuality-anonymity spectrum and the alterity spectrum are, I think, best understood together. A great example of an anonymous egoic (i.e., extremely low-alterity) voice is “the they,” as described by Heidegger.  In a word, the they is all the norms of one’s ingroup. It is an anonymous “one,” showing up when one thinks, “One must wash one’s hands before eating,” and acts accordingly. Such a highly anonymous voice with low alterity is, for lack of a better term, the voice of God. By this, I only mean that one finds this voice most compelling, that it is omnipresent, and that it transcends individualized voices so that its source is mysterious, blurry, and probably impossible to identify without having the view of an outsider (or taking the view of an outsider by stepping into the role of a sociologist, for example).

The other kinds of voices that lie on the extreme ends of the two spectrums are: anonymous high-alterity, individualized low-alterity, and individualized high-alterity. For the Republican above, an anonymous voice with high alterity might be the voice of the Democrat type, no particular Democratic politician or newsperson or coworker, but the voice experienced as the whole chorus of voices. Whether that chorus objectively sings in unison is another matter, but it is likely experienced as doing so. An example of an individualized voice with relatively low-alterity is the voice of a close friend. An example of an individualized voice with high-alterity is, if one despises one’s boss, the voice of one’s boss. 

For most people, especially those beyond their adolescent years, the experience of the internal community does not obviously signal the internal community’s existence, and this is only because the members have been integrated around an identity. It is possible for the whole of the internal community to be noticeably fragmented, and it is possible for it to be more or less unified. A minor level of disintegration characterizes the internal community of the man of importance, while high levels of disintegration characterize, for example, most sufferers of schizophrenia where each voice in the internal community is highly individualized and has an obtrusive vivacity.

I’ve used examples where the source of an internal voice is a collection of face-to-face interactions with another human, but a voice in the internal community can be derived from other sources. All sources are quasi-interactions, though. Text- and audio-based correspondence can be sources. But a voice need not be derived from the voice of a real person. It’s possible for a portion of the internal community to be composed of entirely fictional characters whom the individual has read about or watched in a film. Textual sources need not be limited to dialogue between characters. Sections from a work of nonfiction might have representation in the internal community. Advertisements can also have representation.

Although there are many sources, significant others (those who are most important and present in one’s life) have the most dominant presence in the internal community. Part of the reason for this is simply the frequency of interaction (and other types of encounter). Memory of and anticipation of interaction with a certain person typically increases as the frequency of interaction increases. The internal community is partly composed of this memory and anticipation, the rest of the internal community (e.g., the presence of anonymous voices) being derivative of memory and anticipation. Another reason significant others hold such influence is that their voices are imbued with greater value, weight, importance, significance. How another’s voice comes to be imbued with such significance is likely partly due to the frequency of encounter and partly due to other factors, though identifying and exploring those factors is a question too big for this paper because it is essentially the question of who an individual is attracted to, respects, feels threatened by, and so on. 

To return to the man of importance, the internal conflict experienced by him is probably best characterized not as a conflict between the voice of his previous coworker and the voice of his brother, but as a conflict between two somewhat anonymous voices. It might be the case that, in this conflict, the voice of his coworker or brother is experienced on its own, but if it is a serious inner conflict over the man’s self-concept, the opposing voices will seem massive and irreducible to any two individualized voices. Although the conflict—the disintegration—does not make sense without the significant others, the voice of each significant other has congealed with other voices, such as the voices of the man’s boss, his happy clients, the condescending barista, and his mom who at many points during his childhood said with disgust that anybody without a job is worthless. Because the internal conflict is over the man’s self-concept, the two anonymous voices have very low alterity. 

## 3. Application examples: sociometer theory and cognitive dissonance theory
This idea of the internal community can be related to research in psychology. In this section, I discuss it in relation to two areas of research. I discuss how the idea overlaps with and might modify sociometer theory as well as how it relates to cognitive dissonance theory. As a concept that can be useful for multiple areas of research, it might serve to integrate otherwise disjointed areas of research.

One of the most successful theories of self-esteem is sociometer theory, proposed by Mark Leary and colleagues in 1995.[^6]  The theory states that self-esteem serves the survival function of preventing social exclusion. The self-esteem system accomplishes this by gauging how other people value oneself and by using the gathered information to motivate one to behave in ways that guard against social exclusion. The idea of the internal community is consistent with this idea of a sociometer. Indeed, the sociometer can be viewed as an assemblage of voices in the internal community with a particular focus on the affective component of that assemblage. Viewing the sociometer this way, rather than as merely a comprehensive gauge, would explain why “low” self-esteem is in most cases better described as “uncertain self-esteem.”[^7] Competing voices in the internal community can give rise to such uncertainty about one’s inclusion status. 

Another way sociometer theory might benefit from the idea of the internal community is that, if sociometer theory limits the sociometer to a monitor of what other real human beings think about oneself, then the theory would have trouble explaining why certain religious people can maintain high self-esteem even during persecution. For example, Paul tells of experiencing serious signals of social exclusion (such as being whipped and beaten),[^8] yet despite this persecution, Paul does not renounce Christianity. Instead, he and other Christians treat persecution as a character-building experience and as a gift. Such confidence in the face of imminent suffering does not entirely fit with current sociometer theory, which states that people will modify their behavior to avoid such serious social exclusion.[^9] A sociometer theorist might argue that Christians in such scenarios are trying to avoid being excluded from their Christian group, but this explanation would break down in cases of imminent death and potential martyrdom because, in these situations, there is no reason being excluded from the religious group should be feared more than being excluded from the threatening group unless the “group” of Christianity extends to a group—a community—that includes God. Such scenarios are consistent with the internal community model because in this model, God (and fairies and wizards) can be just as present in the internal community as other voices, especially if the voices find support in an external community.[^10] Sociometer theory should include this possibility that an individual’s sociometer is not merely a gauge of what other human beings think of the individual, but is also a gauge of what, for example, God thinks of the individual.

Since I introduced the internal community with an example of cognitive dissonance, it would be remiss not to relate the internal community idea to cognitive dissonance theory. This idea of an internal community points out, I think, a domain of possible scenarios of cognitive dissonance and, importantly, a situating of the dissonance (experienced in these scenarios) in a social world. For example, a person who moves from an ultra-religious, theistic setting into an atheistic one will likely experience cognitive dissonance over their religious beliefs. Classical cognitive dissonance theory would frame this internal conflict as dissonance between cognitions, where a cognition is “any knowledge, opinion, or belief about the environment, about oneself, or about one’s behavior.”[^11]  The dissonance experienced by the religious person who moves to an atheistic culture would be described as, for example, a conflict between the belief that there is a God and a belief that there is not a God. But this misses the social aspect. In the religious setting, the person very likely encountered at least the possibility that some people don’t believe in God, but it’s quite possible that the person never seriously considered the atheistic position and so never experienced dissonance with regard to this particular belief. How is this possible? The internal community model offers a better explanation of this dissonance. The person is the site of competing voices, each of which has an affective coloring and a different degree of significance. The dissonance is the experience of the pull of humans with opposing worldviews. That is, the dissonance is not conflict between mere beliefs or opinions; there is a social aspect, too, and if it is not taken into account, the picture is incomplete. Because of the importance of the social aspect, the internal community model allows for the possibility that the religious person did not experience cognitive dissonance before being enmeshed in the atheistic setting. Before moving on, I want to make clear that the internal community idea is in no way meant to be a new model of cognitive dissonance; appealing to the internal community would certainly fail to explain many kinds of cognitive dissonance. The idea is valuable, however, in that it raises to awareness potentially overlooked scenarios as well as the particularly social nature of such scenarios. 

## 4. Objections and clarifications
One might object that the internal community is problematic because if for each person the person’s internal community is constituted by voices derived from outside himself, then there is an infinite regress of the sources of voices, yet this is impossible because there have only been a finite number of human beings. In other words, where does the first voice come from? There is no infinite regress, however, because the internal community does not replace the self. It does not replace one’s own voice.[^12] Just as one is situated in an external community, so too one’s voice is situated in—not constituted by—an internal community. The internal community is not a chorus in which one’s own voice is necessarily lost. It is possible for the internal community to have a say in, so to speak, one’s voice and sense of self, even if the internal community does not wholly determine one’s voice and sense of self.

Another objection is that what I’m calling the internal community is merely the imagination of other people (and fictional characters, etc.). While this objection expresses some truth, it is misleading. Memory is involved in the constitution of the internal community. Individualized voices are, as I said, more or less the memory and anticipation of those voices as they are outside the internal community. We could even see that anonymous voices might be described as implicit memories. A problem with this approach that emphasizes memory, however, is that it fails to take into account the unity of the internal community. The internal community is not reducible to this voice or that voice because it is the web that emerges from many voices. For example, an integrated internal community is different than a disintegrated internal community. Reducing the internal community to memory might help us make sense of individual voices, but then we would have difficulty making sense of the whole that emerges from their interaction. Another problem with the memory-centric account is that it points in the wrong direction. Whereas the internal community model points to the present and to ongoing internal activity, the memory-centric account points to the past and to solidified—not active—representations, thus denying the dynamic character of the internal conflict explored in the example of the man of importance, for example. Even though the objection is not entirely wrong in wanting to include a discussion of memory, it is misleading because it fails to emphasize the interconnected and dynamic nature of the phenomenon I call the internal community.

Finally, one might say that the internal community model is no better at accounting for the emotional aspect of internal conflict than a belief-based cognitive dissonance account. By not, this objection goes, explicitly discussing affect in relation to the internal community, I failed to address the very problem I intended to address, namely, that a traditional cognitive dissonance account excludes the lived experience, particularly the affective aspect of that experience. Although my account did not explicitly catalogue the ways affect plays a role in the internal community (for that would take me beyond the scope of this paper), it implicitly includes a space for affect. A voice, unlike a belief, always has a tone. This is true of voices perceived with one’s ears as well as of voices in the internal community. Tone is the medium through which affect is conveyed. Affective content always accompanies conceptual content in the case of a voice. The affect could be strong or weak, happy or sad, hungry or satiated, etc. A belief, however, is considered as conceptual content that may or may not be accompanied by affect, at least in our discourse.[^13]  The notions of value and desire clearly include room for affect, but this isn’t helpful for our purposes because, as we saw, the kind of internal conflict that the internal community addresses is not accounted for by values and desires. The internal community model offers the best account of the internal conflict described above because, unlike belief, a voice has tone and, therefore, affect.

## 5. Summary
The internal community shows itself in some kinds of internal conflict, for example, conflict over one’s identity. The internal community is composed of voices, each of which is derived from a source or composite of sources in the social world. Voices vary along both a spectrum of individuality-anonymity and a spectrum of alterity (ego-other). The entire collection of voices can be more or less integrated. In relation to sociometer theory and cognitive dissonance theory, the internal community model might offer valuable refinements and might serve as an integrative concept. The internal community does not present a problem of infinite regress, is not reducible to memory, and accounts for the affective component of internal conflict.


## References

Berger, Peter and Thomas Luckmann. The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge. New York: Anchor Books, 1967.

Cameron, Jessica J. and Danu Anthony Stinson. “Sociometer Theory.” In Encyclopedia of Personality and Individual Differences, 1-6. Edited by Virgil Zeigler-Hill and Todd Shackelford. New York: Springer International Publishing, 2017. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28099-8_1187-1.

Festinger, Leon. A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance. United Kingdom: Stanford University Press, 1957.

Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Translated by Edward Robinson. New York: Harper Perennial Modern Thought, 2008.

Horrigan-Kelly, Marcella, Michelle Millar, and Maura Dowling. “Understanding the Key Tenets of Heidegger’s Philosophy for Interpretive Phenomenological Research.” International Journal of Qualitative Methods 15, no. 1 (2016): 1-8. https://doi.org/10.1177/1609406916680634.

Kaufman, Scott Barry. Transcend: The New Science of Self-Actualization. New York: TarcherPerigee, 2020.

Leary, Mark R., Ellen S. Tambor, Sonja K. Terdal, and Deborah L. Downs. “Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis.” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 68, no. 3 (1995): 518-530. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.68.3.518.

Lerner, Jennifer S., Ye Li, Piercarlo Valdesolo, and Karim Kassam. “Emotions and Decision Making.” Annual Review of Psychology 66, (2015): 799-823. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115043.

Lieberman, Matthew D. Social: Why Our Brains Are Wired to Connect. New York: Broadway Books, 2013.

Merleau-Ponty, Maurice. Phenomenology of Perception. Translated by Donald A. Landes. New York: Routledge, 2012.

Siegel, Daniel J. The Developing Mind: How Relationships and the Brain Interact to Shape Who We Are. 2nd ed. New York: The Guilford Press, 2012.


## Endnotes
[^1]: Peter Berger and Thomas Luckmann, *The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge* (New York: Anchor Books, 1967), 154-155.

[^2]: Berger and Luckmann, The Social Construction of Reality, 131. Although it seems Berger and Luckmann use “significant others” to refer only to those who mediate the objective social world to the individual during primary socialization, for our purposes, it refers simply to those who are most important and present in one’s life.

[^3]: I might believe that a round square is conceivable but also that I cannot conceive one. There is at least some tension between my two beliefs here, enough that an explanation for how both can be true would be satisfying; conflict does not necessarily mean contradiction. Despite the conflict between beliefs, though, I can dispassionately think about them, and I can even go through the rest of my life without once being emotionally disturbed by the tension. 

[^4]: Jennifer S. Lerner, Ye Li, Piercarlo Valdesolo, and Karim Kassam, “Emotions and Decision Making,” *Annual Review of Psychology* 66, (2015): 799-823, https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-psych-010213-115043.

[^5]: Berger and Luckman, *The Social Construction of Reality*, 30.

[^6]: Jessica J. Cameron and Danu Anthony Stinson, “Sociometer Theory,” in *Encyclopedia of Personality and Individual Differences*, ed. Virgil Zeigler-Hill and Todd Shackelford (New York: Springer International Publishing, 2017), 1-6, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-28099-8_1187-1.

[^7]: Scott Barry Kaufman, *Transcend: The New Science of Self-Actualization* (New York: TarcherPerigee, 2020), 66.

[^8]: 2 Cor. 11:23-29.

[^9]: Mark R. Leary, Ellen S. Tambor, Sonja K. Terdal, and Deborah L. Downs, “Self-esteem as an interpersonal monitor: The sociometer hypothesis,” *Journal of Personality and Social Psychology* 68, no. 3 (1995): 519-520, https://doi.org/10.1037/0022-3514.68.3.518; Cameron and Stinson, “Sociometer Theory,” 1.

[^10]: I admit the case of Paul might not be the best because, if the biblical account is somewhat accurate, he experienced at least one hallucination of Jesus, which caused the voice of Jesus (God) to have a more real voice in the internal community than it otherwise would have. Nonetheless, the example is helpful because it stands in for other scenarios in which a voice with no apparent external correlate influences people.

[^11]: Leon Festinger, *A Theory of Cognitive Dissonance* (United Kingdom: Stanford University Press, 1957), 3.

[^12]: I suppose it is possible that one’s voice be entirely lost, for example, in cases of extreme dissociation. However, such cases are exceptional, and that such cases can be remedied suggests at least the latent presence of one’s own voice, further suggesting that the internal community does not entirely replace one’s voice.

[^13]: It seems unlikely that conceptual content is ever entirely devoid of affect. That is, although it is possible to talk about conceptual content without mentioning affective content and vice versa, it seems that there is not such a sharp divide in experience. 
